From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and [music] this is The Daily.
In a move that shocked lawmakers on both
sides of the aisle, President Trump is
dropping his $10 billion lawsuit against
the IRS. Democrats and others are crying
foul over what his administration plans
to do instead. [music]
>> Justice Department announced an almost
$2 billion fund of taxpayer money to
compensate people that the
administration [music] claims have been
victims of quote "weaponization and
warfare." Among those who could apply
for payouts the nearly 1,600 rioters
charged in connection with the January
6th Capitol insurrection.
>> This is reimbursing people that were
horribly treated, horribly treated. It's
anti-weaponization [music]
they made. Today, my colleague Andy
Duran on the story of how this came
[music] about, who might get the money,
and the bipartisan outrage that has
[music] ensued.
>> He's setting up a $1.7 billion
political slush fund for the Proud Boys
and the Oath Keepers and his political
lieutenants and hangers-on. I think that
there are a lot of questions that the
administration is going to have to
answer.
>> [music]
>> It's Wednesday, May 20th.
So, we have talked a lot on The Daily
about President Trump's campaign of
retribution against his enemies in his
second term, how he's wielded the
federal government to do that, and this
week it feels like we entered into a new
chapter of that story with the creation
of this enormous fund. We're going to
talk about how the fund works and who's
likely to benefit, but before we get
into that, you, Andy, have been covering
all of this and I just want to start
with you explaining where did this fund
even come from?
So, yeah, this story really starts the
first time that President Trump ran for
office in 2016.
He was unique among presidential
candidates at that time and this was
something of a scandal in that he did
not release his tax returns. It was
standard practice for presidential
candidates to put out some of their tax
information as a way to understand their
finances, and Trump didn't do that, and
this was a topic of wide interest
throughout his first term. There were
various attempts to see his tax returns,
and that didn't happen until the New
York Times in 2020 published a series of
stories describing what Trump had been
doing on his taxes, and revealing that
for many years Trump had been paying
little in federal income taxes.
>> Right. And to be clear, those stories
relied on leaked tax returns. I remember
this. Yes, it wasn't clear how, it
wasn't clear where this information came
from. It could have maybe come from
accountants or lawyers who worked for
President Trump, or had worked for
President Trump, or the Trump
organization. It wasn't clear what the
source of this information was. But,
reporters for the Times had gotten their
hands on and reviewed President Trump's
tax returns.
>> Mhm. Fast forward about 6 months to a
year after that, and ProPublica, a
separate news organization, they start
releasing a series of stories about the
tax strategies and tax situations of
some of the world's wealthiest people.
You know, looking at the tax situations
of people like Jeff Bezos, Elon Musk,
the positions they were taking on their
taxes in a lot of detail.
>> [music]
>> And so, at that point it became clear
that given the tax information of so
many different people, I mean,
eventually it's been disclosed that
thousands of individuals and entities
had their information released, that
somebody within the IRS and with access
to internal IRS records must have been
the source of these stories. Put another
way, it became clear that the IRS had a
leaker.
Yes, that there was somebody in their
systems who was providing this
information to the press and [music] in
the fall of 2023, somebody was
eventually caught, a man named Charles
Littlejohn, a former IRS He had been a
contractor for the IRS
>> [music]
>> and he played guilty to having provided
this information about Trump and then
all these other wealthy individuals to
the Times and ProPublica and then he was
sentenced to prison in the beginning of
2024. Obviously, leaking somebody's
[music] tax information is a crime.
Yes, it is a crime and it's also
something that people can sue the IRS
for. So, there is a civil lawsuit
process that exists for people who think
that their tax information has been
improperly released by the IRS. They can
sue the IRS and potentially get damages
for that. And so, in January, President
Trump, two of his sons, [music] and the
family business demanded at least $10
million from the IRS for the leak of
this information, basically arguing that
the IRS should have stopped [music]
Charles Littlejohn from being able to do
this.
And as you said, people can sue the IRS
when their personal tax information is
compromised, is leaked. That is what he
did. The difference here, though, is
that he's not just a private citizen, he
is suing a government that he oversees.
Yes, I mean, this was and is an
extremely unusual situation, if not
unprecedented entirely. I mean, not only
does the president control the leader of
the Internal Revenue Service, the agency
that he is suing, and the Treasury
Department, which was also named in the
suit, you know, he chooses many of the
people who lead those agencies and is
involved in their decision-making.
He has also played an enormous role in
reshaping the Justice Department and
kind of molding it in his image in a
variety of ways. And the Justice
Department is supposed to be the IRS's
lawyer in this case. But, you know,
there have been all sorts of things that
the Justice Department has done in
Trump's second term that are far beyond
what historically independent Justice
Department would do. And so
>> called on the Justice Department to
prosecute those that he considers his
political enemies. Democratic lawmakers
have faced federal investigation under
his administration. Exactly. And the
idea that this Justice Department, which
is now led by Todd Blanche, the acting
attorney general, who was also President
Trump's personal lawyer before he
returned to the White House, would be
making decisions about how to defend a
lawsuit that the president had brought
immediately just raised all sorts of
questions about the conflict of interest
inherent in such a situation where
President Trump is obviously controlling
the private lawyers that he hired to
bring this suit against the government.
But he is also to a very unusual degree
controlling the lawyers who are supposed
to respond to this suit.
>> I feel like you almost need a whiteboard
to like map out all of these conflicts.
Yeah, I mean, it's just there are two
sides to the case, but Donald Trump sits
on top of both parties in this lawsuit.
And so in that sense, while federal law
does allow for people to bring these
types of lawsuits against the IRS, this
case raises profound questions about
what the outcome would be and whether
there would be a real defense of this
suit and whether the Justice Department
would contest what President Trump was
claiming in his lawsuit against the IRS.
So, how does all this play out in court?
Basically, given all of these tangled
web of conflicts between President Trump
and the Justice Department and the
conflict of interest between lawyers who
are working for the president in a
private capacity and the lawyers who are
working for him under the federal
government, the judge starts to worry
that this lawsuit can't proceed.
There's a legal principle that the two
sides in a lawsuit have to actually be
in conflict with each other. That you
can't sue yourself or sue your friend
and hope to go manufacture a favorable
legal ruling from a judge that will
benefit both sides. That there has to be
a genuine tension between the two
parties in a lawsuit or else the judge
has to throw it out. The judge can say I
can't rule on this because it's not a
real lawsuit essentially. And so the
judge was questioning whether a real
lawsuit even existed here. And so she
asked the Justice Department and
President Trump's lawyers to write
briefs. They were supposed to be due
today explaining themselves and telling
her, "Are you actually fighting with
each other or is this kind of all a
charade and you have filed this lawsuit
essentially under false pretenses." In
which case the judge could have
dismissed it. And she was indicating
that she was certainly considering just
throwing it out entirely. It was looking
like this was not going in the
president's favor in other words. Yeah.
Yes. And the Justice Department was
going to have to explain that and doing
so would have potentially been very
awkward because for them to say that
this lawsuit should exist, they would
have had to show their face in this case
and say, "Here I am to oppose the
president's claims." Which people at the
Justice Department, especially this
Justice Department, didn't want to do.
Where people have gotten fired for
opposing the president. Yes, exactly.
And so folks within the administration
were working feverishly last week to
avoid that scenario and to avoid
potentially embarrassing ruling from the
judge.
>> [music]
>> And what they arrived at was that
President Trump would drop his lawsuit
entirely. And in exchange the Justice
Department would create this
unprecedented gigantic pot of taxpayer
money that [music] the Justice
Department will control to compensate
victims of  unquote
weaponization.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Okay, so Andy talked to us about this
gigantic pot of money. What do we know
about it? How is it supposed to work?
Yeah, so we don't know everything yet,
but what we do know is that this will be
$1 billion $776
million.
>> 1776, year of our nation's founding.
Exactly, which I do not think is a
coincidence, obviously. But yeah, this
is a huge amount of money that
will be drawn from an account called the
Judgment Fund,
which is basically a pot of money that
the Justice Department can use to settle
legal claims against the United States.
So anytime the government is sued and
they want to settle, they can use money
from this fund. It's not usually quite
this much that's taken out of it at a
time, but they will be withdrawing money
from that account, depositing it in a
separate account, which will be
controlled by five people appointed by
the Attorney General, and they will
consider claims from people who say that
they have been victimized by the federal
government and pay them for it.
>> Mhm. You know, there's a lot that we
still don't know and are hoping to find
out about this money, including exactly
how claims for payment will be
evaluated, what weaponization means
exactly when the Justice Department says
that, and how they'll decide how much
money they should be paid. We still
don't even know who these five people
are that will be controlling this money
and making these decisions. And
obviously, they'll will a huge role in
all of this. So there are a lot of
questions across Washington right now
about what this could ultimately look
like.
Has something like this ever happened
before?
I mean, I think it's safe to say that
while the Justice Department does settle
other lawsuits, they've never done
something quite like this before. Can
you just talk a little bit, Andy, about
the types of people that theoretically
could be eligible to apply for this
fund? Like, who are we talking about
here? Yeah, so all the Justice
Department themselves have said about
this are people who are victims of
weaponization and
lawfare. But, in terms of people who
believe that they'll be eligible and
people who are excited about this, I
mean, one of the main groups we've heard
from so far are people who were
convicted on January 6th, 2021 for
storming the Capitol and who President
Trump previously pardoned. And there are
other similar supporters and political
allies of the president who say that
under President Obama, the Justice
Department, the FBI improperly
investigated them basically because they
were Trump supporters and now this is
their opportunity to get money to make
them whole from that experience. But
again, there are all sorts of questions
swirling around this and we don't know
if these payments would be specifically
to pay back any sort of legal fees they
may have incurred or if there will just
be payments beyond that where they could
basically profit from the experience
overall. So, there's not necessarily
going to be clear receipts about who's
receiving this money and how much money
they're receiving. And so, based on what
we know right now, this entire operation
might be very hidden from public view.
But obviously, you know, that's a live
question. I think to a lot of people
though, the idea that somebody who
stormed the Capitol on January 6th could
get paid by the government would be
shocking, to put it mildly. Like, we are
talking about in some cases
convicted criminals who could
theoretically get money from a
government that they attacked. Is that
right?
That is certainly the scenario that
people are asking a lot of questions
about and that certainly seems possible
under the way that this fund has been
set up for sure. It would also by the
way explain some of the reaction that we
have heard to this announcement about
this money that we've seen from both
sides of the aisle.
Yeah, so the acting attorney general
Todd Blanche happened to be scheduled to
testify on Capitol Hill on Tuesday to
discuss appropriations the Justice
Department's budget. Good morning to all
of you ranking member Van Hollen
Senator Collins Senator Moran good
morning.
Thank you for the opportunity to present
President Trump's fiscal year 2027
budget.
>> During the hearing Blanche defended the
arrangement by saying that the judgment
fund this pot of money had been used in
similar ways in the past. It is true
that this is unusual. That is true. Um
but it is not unprecedented and it was
done to
>> And he told the committee that anyone
could get money out of the fund
regardless of their politics. It's not
limited to Republicans. It's not limited
to Biden
>> it was. It's not limited to to the Biden
weaponization. It's not limited to in
any way scope or form to January 6th or
to Jack Smith. There's no limitation on
the
on the claims.
But that hearing quickly became
basically an opportunity for lawmakers
and particularly Democrats to really
push him on this arrangement. Mr.
Attorney General this is an outrageous
unprecedented slush fund. And push him
on what they called a slush fund that
the administration had set up to pay the
president's political allies. Will
individuals who assaulted Capitol Hill
police officers be eligible for this
fund?
Well, as it makes plain anybody in this
country is eligible to apply if they
believe they are a victim of
weaponization.
>> Mr. Attorney General, let me ask you
this. In particular, these Democrats
wanted to know whether people who
stormed the Capitol on January 6th would
be beneficiary of these funds.
>> [music]
>> That is pure theft of public funds.
And rewarding individuals who committed
crimes is obscene.
Every American can see through this
illegal, corrupt, self-dealing scheme.
Senator Chris Van Hollen accused Blanche
of public theft of this money and said
that it was part of President Trump's
broader revenge tour during his second
term in office. Mr. Blanche, the record
is crystal clear.
You are still acting
as the president's personal lawyer, not
as acting
Attorney General. It is hard to justify
giving you any funds
that will enable this pattern of
wrongdoing to continue. [music]
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
But there are also signs that
Republicans on Capitol Hill are a little
squeamish about this whole idea. You
start to see some some questions from
them about what this money could be for
and how it could be used. And even the
Senate Majority Leader, John Thune, Mr.
Chairman, another topic. Another topic.
The Acting Attorney
>> outside of the hearing made some
comments to reporters on Tuesday,
essentially suggesting that Congress
will be taking a close look at this pot
of money. Do you believe this is a
legitimate fund and do you believe those
terms are fair? I think that there are
and and will be continue to be a lot of
questions around that that the
administration is going to have to
answer. Leader, last week And so even
some of the mild discontent that we're
seeing right now publicly from top
Republican lawmakers is, I think, an
indication that this is not something
again that even people in President
Trump's party are excited about or proud
of and it sounds like there are concerns
too even within the Trump
administration. The top lawyer at the
Treasury Department which will play a
role in creating this fund suddenly
resigned on Monday just hours after its
creation and my initial reporting is
that this resignation was in part
because of the creation of this fund. I
want to ask about President Trump
himself and whether he is going to
benefit from this. But he's obviously
the one who sued the IRS, right? So can
he apply for this fund? So the Justice
Department has said that the president
himself and his two sons and the Trump
organization which again are the people
who and the entities that brought the
suit in the first place will not be paid
out of the fund themselves. That said we
learned on Tuesday that another
provision in this agreement between
Trump and the Justice Department is that
the IRS will drop any audits it has of
Trump, his family members and any
related business entities which is
itself very unusual and extraordinary
concession to make to the president and
is also one that could directly benefit
him financially. I mean there it's
unclear what sort of audits the
president himself may be facing right
now but it's potentially a protection
that could deliver him tens of millions
of dollars in direct financial benefit
if if the IRS was planning to charge him
more in taxes and now they are not going
to be able to under this agreement. That
is something that could go directly into
his pockets. He might avoid giant tax
bills to the tunes of tens of millions
of dollars is what you're saying. I mean
essentially again the Times has reported
and it's been publicly reported that the
president has faced audits in the past
in which if
the IRS won essentially the president
would owe more than a hundred million
dollars in additional taxes. And so we
don't know what the situation is now,
what odds he and his family members may
be facing, but this has robbed the IRS
of the opportunity to demand that the
Trumps pay the taxes that the IRS says
that they may owe under the law. Is
there anything that anybody in Congress,
or anybody for that matter, can do to
stop this if they find it objectionable?
We'll find out. So, I think on one
level, there was an attempt by some
House Democrats to intervene in the
original lawsuit that President Trump
filed and can further try and convince
the judge to put a stop to it.
Obviously, that ship has now sailed. So,
I think the question now is whether
Congress takes any steps to change how
money can be spent on legal settlements
generally, or specifically trying to
address this situation. So, under the
Constitution, Congress has the power of
the purse. That's a power that's
certainly been eroded under this
presidency and that the Trump
administration has tried to kind of pull
back into the executive branch, but it
is something that, at least
theoretically, Congress could take some
steps and pass some laws to address, but
it's unclear if that will actually
happen. I don't think I'm going out on a
limb here by saying that most people
probably did not even know that this pot
of money existed for the DOJ to use
until this week, probably. So, you are
in a good position to kind of help us
make sense of this. Like, what should we
make of the fact that this money is now
being used in this way? I think we
should think about this in a broader
context of what President Trump has
hoped to accomplish in his return to
office. And one of his main goals was
obviously retribution against people and
agencies that he saw as having been
opposed to him the first time he was in
office and while he was out of it. And I
think what this usage of the fund
indicates is that now the Trump
administration is making that next step
from revenge to compensation for
President Trump's allies. And some
ethics experts and watchdogs are calling
this the most corrupt act in American
history. Just to bring it back to where
we started, what this represents is also
not just using the DOJ to punish
enemies, but using it to reward allies.
Yes, exactly. But I think there is a
significant difference and advancement
of that agenda in this prospect of
directly paying people of essentially
the president's choosing with taxpayer
dollars.
>> Mhm. There are almost no limits or
controls on how this money will be used.
These people who will be selected by
Todd Blanche, the president's former
defense lawyer, will have seemingly
total freedom to give money to whoever
they deem is worthy of it and to give
them as much money as they want.
>> [music]
>> And so this is a very aggressive and
extraordinary use of the money that we,
the American public, all pay on our
taxes and that the government borrows on
our behalf. And it could go to simply
whoever has been loyal to the president.
They could be cashing out to the tunes
of thousands or tens of thousands,
hundreds of thousands, or even millions
of dollars. And so it's a It is just a
really radical and striking situation.
Andy Duran, thank you so much.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
In a closely watched Republican primary,
seven-term Congressman Thomas Massie
[music] of Kentucky was defeated by
President Trump's handpicked challenger
Ed Gallrein. I want to thank President
Trump
for his support,
>> [cheering]
[applause]
>> his endorsement,
and his counsel
as I navigated this campaign, which is a
journey. Massie lost caps a remarkable
demonstration across three states of
Trump's power to exile his opponents
from the Republican Party.
In a matter of weeks, Trump ousted five
Republican state lawmakers in Indiana
who opposed [music] his plan to redraw
election maps there, a US senator from
Louisiana who voted to impeach Trump,
[music] and now Massie, who broke with
Trump on several key issues, including
Jeffrey Epstein. For 14 years, those
SOBs in Washington tried to buy my vote.
They couldn't buy it.
And the Senate [music] agreed to take up
a measure to force President Trump to
either end the war in Iran or secure
approval [music] from Congress to
continue it. The move comes after a
handful of Republicans joined Democrats
in pushing forward with a resolution
that [music] the GOP has managed to
block for months.
Today's episode was produced by Lexi Dio
[music] and Stella Tan. It was edited by
Rachel Quester and Lisa Balin. It
contains music by Dan Wong, Alicia Bitu,
[music] Marion Lozano, and Dan Powell.
Our theme music is by Wonderly. This
episode was engineered by Chris Wood.
Special thanks [music] to Alan Feuer.
>> [music]
>> That's [music] it for The Daily. I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.